---
title: "My adventure with Ubuntu and LCOM's exam day"
date: '2020-05-02'
---

The 2 days before the recovery exam had some 'funny' moments, as described by some of my friends, so I've decided to write about them (mostly because they said it was a good idea).

## Intro

Some months ago, I had an exam for one of my university classes (LCOM) where I
got a 0. Since the minimum grade was 8, this meant that I had to repeat that
exam at the end of the semester. The exam was actually really easy, but I wrote
**0x12** instead of **12** as the value of a constant (yes, that was enough to
get 0 because it didn't pass the automatic tests).  
The 2 days before the recovery exam had some "funny moments", as described by some
of my friends, so I've decided to write about them (mostly because they said it was
a good idea).

## CHIP and the deal with Ubuntu

I've had a small single-board computer, very similar to a
[raspberry pi](https://www.raspberrypi.org), for a few years now called
[CHIP](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CHIP_(computer)>). Unfortunately, the
company that manufactured it has declared bankruptcy in 2018, so I can't link a
product page. The best I can do is link the
[community's subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/ChipCommunity/) where they have
some fantastic and impressive preservation efforts.

### Why this is relevant

My friend got her first raspberry pi for Christmas and started playing around
with [mycroft](https://mycroft.ai/) (she was unsure about where to start, so I
suggested it). BTW, if you're looking for an A.I. assistant that respects your
privacy and/or is fun and easy to develop for, I can recommend
[mycroft](https://mycroft.ai/).  
 At some point she wanted to find a skill to stream music but there were some problems.
We don't have Spotify premium and the official Pandora skill was not working properly.
The Pandora sound was coming out distorted and slowed down, and we have no idea why.
We started searching online for skills that played sound from youtube videos, but
none of the 2 or 3 that we found worked.

After all those attempts, we decided to create our own
[mycroft skill](https://github.com/JoaoCostaIFG/mycroft-youtubedl-skill) to play
the sound from youtube videos. I might write a blog post about it next. This is
why I wanted to get the CHIP working again. I needed something to install
mycroft on, so I could test the skill.

### Flashing an OS on CHIP

I checked out the [CHIP subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/ChipCommunity/) and
found this [flashing tool](https://github.com/Thore-Krug/Flash-CHIP). Everything
sounded great, except for the part about all the script's dependencies. I didn't
feel like searching for them on Arch since the script only supported **apt**.
After briefly thinking about it, I decided to set up a virtual machine with a
**Debian-based distro** to run the script on.  
 For some idiotic reason, the first **Debian-based distro** that came to my mind
was Ubuntu. This was very unfortunate. I should also note that I wasn't sure if my
CHIP was dead or not because I had some problems with it the last time I picked it
up.

### The Ubuntu virtual machine

I started by downloading the [Ubuntu](https://ubuntu.com) 19.10 desktop image
file. It was a **2.3 GB** .iso file and it still requires Internet access to
finish the installation. That's way too big. For comparison, the
[Debian](https://www.Debian.org) image is **335 MB** and the
[Arch Linux](https://www.archlinux.org) one is **646 MB** (as of release
2020.02.01).

After the download, I used [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/) to create
an Ubuntu virtual machine. I left pretty much all the options at the default
values for Ubuntu systems, except for an increase in ram and storage space.

### The problems

The installation process froze for me, several times, for no apparent reason. I
got curious and started trying to press all keyboard keys (it only froze for me
on inputs). It seems pressing the Escape key was the culprit (I press it on
instinct because of **vim**).

At some point, the _clicky-clicky_ GUI asked me if I wanted the full or the
minimal installation. I just wanted to set up the virtual machine ASAP, so I
selected the minimal option. It was a mistake. It is at this point that I should
tell you the installation took over one hour to complete. I'm not sure why it
took that long given the fact that I was using a beefy virtual machine. I've
created some windows virtual machine and none have taken more than 30 minutes to
finish the installation process, but Ubuntu has always taken a long time to
install in every machine I've tried (even as the sole main OS).  
 The minimal installation is hilarious because it does the full install and then
uninstalls the packages that are considered _extra_. Needless to say that this "minimal"
installation takes a lot longer than the full one (great design).

After going through all that, I ran the script and it failed (managed to install
all the dependencies tho). I read that it needs USB 2.0 to work, but at this
point, I wasn't even able to access USB devices on the guest. After quick trip
to the
[Arch wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/VirtualBox#Accessing_host_USB_devices_in_guest),
I got everything I needed. I had to add my user to the _vboxusers_ group and
install the **VirtualBox extension pack**. After that, I tried booting Ubuntu.
The important part is that I tried, because it got stuck on the purple Ubuntu
screen. I tried uninstalling the **extension pack** and disabling USB 2.0 but it
still wouldn't work :/. It was time to reinstall Ubuntu.  
 Something weird happened now. The **Ubuntu .iso** file was deleted when I deleted
the virtual machine, but I didn't notice it. I was still able to mount it on the
new virtual machine and proceed with the installation for a while before it froze,
so it took a lot of time for me to notice this. This means I was stuck trying everything
I could think of to find the problem with the Ubuntu installation when it was just
missing the image file.

After all this, I just gave up on Ubuntu. To be fair, the second installation
failed because I deleted the image file by mistake, but all the time needed to
install the distro and it only booting once was too much for me.

### The Debian virtual machine

I feel somewhat dumb because I didn't initially think about Debian. I literally
thought about Ubuntu before Debian when looking for a **Debian-based** distro. I
feel ashamed when I say this out loud.

Sometimes I hear (or read) some people say, both on the Internet and in real
life, that Debian is hard to install. I didn't have any problems with its
installation GUI and it was done in about 20 minutes. I can say that it was a
fairly user-friendly, straight forward process, and fast process.

Besides learning about guest USB device access on VirtualBox, all this work was
pretty pointless because the OS flashing script didn't work. The script
execution kept failing and, from what I could see on the GitHub issues, reddit
comments and the repository's README file, the error I was having is fairly
common, but none of the solutions worked. I believe my CHIP is dead.

With this, I installed mycroft on the Debian virtual machine I had just set up
and used it that way (should've done that to begin with).

## Beginning of the exam day

I woke up really early, so I could get to school with a lot of time to spare (I
got there at 9am and exam was at 2pm). Shortly after I got there, a friend of
mine that also needed to repeat the exam met up with me at the library. I could
lie and say we were responsible and took the time to study together, but we just
watched some [Noita](https://noitagame.com/) speedruns and played
[I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_Have_No_Mouth,_and_I_Must_Scream).
We had fun doing that for a couple of hours and then got up to go get a friend's
of my friend new school card.

The owner of the card attends a different university, so it was the first time I
visited what most consider our "rival university". We got lost for a while there
because it is not possible to access all rooms of the building we visited
without going outside (a bit like having to leave the house to go to the
bathroom).  
 When we finally managed to find the room we needed to find (not even the cleaning
ladies there were sure about where it was), the guy that takes care of the cards
told us that he "wasn't allowed to give us the card because he wasn't notified of
it" (even though we had her citizens card, old school card and an email forwarded
from her school email with the information needed to get the card). I immediately
started thinking that we just wasted time, when the guy just handed over her card
while saying "I can't do this". We left that university with the card so it seems
the guy _can do things that he cannot do_.

After that errand, we were joined by two other friends (that were also repeating
the exam) for lunch. It was here that I first told the story of my _Ubuntu
adventure_.

## Exam time

Even though I started slowly, I was able to finish the exam in about 1 hour (it
was a 3-hour exam). I found it harder than the one I failed but easy
nonetheless. I believe the teacher made that exam in a way that made it very
easy if you didn't just memorize stuff but actually learned something (if you
didn't, you would have a ton of trouble with that exam).  
 During the exam, the teacher noticed I was using **VIM** to code and had written
a small script to make the testing of the code fast and automatic, so he came up
to me and we had a short exchange it. Obviously, this gave me an enormous confidence
boost. I started heading home afterwards.

## End of the exam day

The only thing that's somewhat interesting to share about the rest of that day
is the small bus accident on my way home.

The only free spots on the bus I took home were the two seats right on top of
one of the back wheels. I was sitting down quietly listening to music (the
**Fear Incoculum** album by **Tool**) when I heard one of the loudest sounds
I've ever heard. I felt my seat jump up violently and all I could see outside
was smoke and some black things passing by at high speed. Everyone went silent
and started looking around with a confused look on their faces.  
 After the scare (and me moving to seat next to me because of it), the driver told
us one the tires blew up (like everyone expected already), but he also said it was
good enough for him to take us to next stop (my stop) if we distributed the weight
away from that wheel. What followed was an extremely long and slow ride home with
the constant sound of a piece tire banging against the bus. It was neither fun nor
good for my hearing. I wonder if this is why most buses I see now have 3 wheels on
each side.

## Conclusions

I dislike Ubuntu, taking a school card that doesn't belong to me was easier than
it should be, I didn't fail LCOM, and bus tires can explode with, what seemed
like, enough force to kill someone.  
 Hope you found these as funny as some of my friends did.  
 Stay safe :P